







americanamerican-apa
references.bib


 ./images/ 


pastie

#1





iso
	short=ISO,
	long=International Organization for Standardization



ansi
	short=ANSI,
	long=American National Standards Institute


jis
	short=JIS,
	long=Japanese International Standards


wpm
	short=WPM,
	long=Words per Minute


neck
	short=WRNULD,
	long=Work-related neck and upper limb disorders


cv
	short=CV,
	long=Computer Vision


roi
	short=ROI,
	long=Region of Interest


cts
	short=CTS,
	long=Carpal Tunnel Syndrome


jwt
	short=JWT,
	long=JSON Web Tokens


fpacc
	short=FP ACC,
	long=Finger Placement Accuracy


hfpacc
	short=HFP ACC,
	long=Historical Finger Placement Accuracy


cps
	short=CPS,
	long=Characters per Second




[display]

Chapter 
0em


















shapes,positioning,calc


external
width=1,compat=1.9








P[1]>p#1
R[1]>
0ptm#1


equationsequ



	





gobble

	
	
	
			1cm

	Development of a Finger-Key Identification Module
for a Touch Typing Trainer
	0.5cm

	
	0.25cm
	A Special Project Presented to the

	Faculty of the Department of Computer Science,

	University of the Philippines Cebu

	0.25cm
	In Partial Fulfillment

	Of the Requirements for the Degree

	Bachelor of Science in Computer Science

	0.25cm
	
	0.5cm

	Oscar Vian L. Valles

	BS Computer Science
	0.5cm

	Dhong Fhel K. Gom-os

	Adviser
	0.5cm

	June 2022
		




	
	
			0.25cm

	University of the Philippines Cebu

	College of Science

	Department of Computer Science

	1cm

	Development of a Finger-Key Identification Module
for a Touch Typing Trainer

	1cm

	Permission is given for the following people to have access to this thesis:

	0.25cm

	
	1cm


	(1,0)0.6

	Oscar Vian L. Valles

	Student
	0.5cm

	(1,0)0.6

	Dhong Fhel K. Gom-os

	Special Problem Adviser

		




	APPROVAL SHEET

0.5cm
The faculty of the University of the Philippines Cebu, College of Science,
Department of Computer Science approves this Special Problem entitled:
0.5cm


	Development of a Finger-Key Identification Module
for a Touch Typing Trainer
	0.5cm
	by
	Oscar Vian L. Valles

	2cm

			(1,0)0.9

	Dhong Fhel K. Gom-os

	Special Problem Adviser

	0.5cm
	(1,0)0.9

	Date Signed
				(1,0)0.9

	Prof. Aileen Joan O. Vicente

	Chair, Department of Computer Science

	0.5cm
	(1,0)0.9

	Date Signed
	
	2cm

	(1,0)0.405

	Prof. Nelia S. Ereno

	Dean, College of Science

	0.5cm
	(1,0)0.405

	Date Signed

	2cm


roman

	Abstract










arabic

Introduction


Background of the Study
There are a lot of educational typing tests available that help people learn
touch typing, including Monkeytype, TypeRacer, and Keybr. These typing tests
list out words that are then typed out. The entered keys are then compared to
check if the user has typed the expected letter. At the end of the test, the
time taken is calculated, and certain metrics are given. These metrics include
wpm and Accuracy bartnik2021.

However, this method of examination leaves out a crucial part of typing —
ergonomics. Ergonomic typing prevents a lot of health issues in the future like
repetitive strain injury or carpal tunnel. One important factor that affects
ergonomics is the typing procedure and posture. This means the proper placement of
the wrist, hands, and hitting the keys using the right finger that is assigned
to the key.

Correct finger placement is usually taught at the beginning using a diagram,
with each key being associated with a specific finger. For instance, the letter
Q in a QWERTY layout should be hit using the fifth digit, or the little finger,
of the left hand, and this is shown by coloring the fifth digit and the key Q
with the same color or by placing the letters directly on the fingers
dobson2009touch.

Incorrect finger placement may cause these hand and wrist positions: ulnar
deviation, forearm pronation, and wrist extension serina1999. These
three are hand and wrist positions that are common in all activities, however,
prolonged periods in these positions may cause injuries such as cts
toosi2015

In addition, this type of typing is frequently taught in the beginner level
donica2018. This means that there is a need to weed out bad habits
that may develop, like using the index finger for pressing the spacebar or
backspace. However, it is impractical for an educator to check each student if
they are not performing these movements as these may only show for a small
period which may not be caught in time.

Thus, there is a need for automatically identifying which finger is used to
press which key during typing - hereby defined as finger-key identification.

Research Questions

	What algorithm or technique using computer vision is capable of
	      finger-key identification.
	What setup and configuration of a single optical camera can be used to
	      capture images during keyboard typing for time finger-key identification
	      using the algorithm identified in 1?
	How to design and develop a finger-key identification module using
	      the algorithm in 1 and camera setup and configuration in 2?
	How accurate is the module developed in 3 in finger-key identification?
	Is the module developed in 3 fast enough to run in real-time?
	What new keyboard typing metric to develop that considers both the key and
	      finger used to press as parameters?

Research Objectives

General Objectives
To create a finger-key identification module that accurately identifies what
finger was used to press a key at a point in time to help develop better typing
habits and healthier typing ergonomics.

Specific Objectives

	Develop an algorithm or technique using computer vision that is capable
	      of finger-key identification.
	Identify the setup and configuration of a single optical camera that can
	      be used to capture images during keyboard typing for finger-key
	      identification using the algorithm identified in 1
	Design and develop a module using the algorithm in 1 and camera setup
	      and configuration in 2
	Determine the accuracy of the module developed in 3 in finger-key
	      identification
	Determine if the module developed in 3 is fast-enough to run in
	      real-time
	Develop a new keyboard typing metric that uses both the key and
	      finger used to press as parameters

Scope and Limitation
This research will focus on typing on a 60% keyboard. Figure illustrates this type of keyboard. This type of keyboard only has the
alphanumeric part of the keyboard. This limits the number of keys to be checked
and the expected movement of the hand. Furthermore, the keycaps will also be of
a light color, while the surface that the keyboard rests upon will be of a dark
color.

In addition, the keyboard layout will be ansi. This layout is described by
the American National Standards Institute ansi. This is the most
common layout in the United States. However, it is also used in numerous
English-speaking countries such as the Philippines, Malaysia, and India
apple-layout.

The setup that will be captured will be simplified and fixed for the development
and testing of the finger-key identification module. This includes the
keyboard, surface it is placed on, and lighting of the entire area. Furthermore,
the setup will not be tested by other respondents, but by the researchers only
- as the focus is on the development and testing of the finger-key
identification module and not on the touch typing trainer and its effects on
typing.

The program will expect the that user has all ten digits and has no hand,
finger, or wrist deformities. In addition, only the placement of the hands,
fingers, and wrists will be taken into account when determining if the
ergonomics of the user while typing is healthy. The program will not check
seating position, angle of elbows, and other metrics for an ergonomic typing
posture while typing.

Capturing of the video to be analyzed by the program would be limited to a
single 720p webcam that is capturing in 30 frames per second. The camera will be
pointed downwards facing the keyboard and the hand.


			A 60% keyboard in ansi layout.
		

Significance of the Research
This research is beneficial for all users of physical keyboards. These include a
majority of the population as there are a lot of professions that heavily rely
on keyboards. Examples include developers, physicians, educators, and
accountants. By having better ergonomics while typing - by touch typing
correctly - wrist injuries can be prevented, and typing speed may be increased

This research also helps educators, especially early educators teaching beginner
typists. By automatically checking for correct technique, the burden of checking
each student is reduced, and directed interventions for bad habits can be
easily created as students with these bad habits are easily identified

This research has a direct impact on people that have hand or wrist injuries
that are caused by poor typing habits. By correcting these poor habits, pain
from these injuries will be reduced, and even be prevented from occurring in the
first place. A specific example of this is by reducing ulnar deviation which
affects the nerve that is indicative of cts toosi2015.

Review of Related Literature

Keyboard Typing

Keyboard typing is the process of using a keyboard to input characters in a
system. In the context of this paper, keyboard typing will refer to the act of
using a physical keyboard to input characters in a computer system.

Keyboard Layouts and Form Factors

One key characteristic of a keyboard is its physical attributes. Keyboards come
in a lot of layouts and form factors. Keyboard layouts are the shapes, size, and
positions of a key on a keyboard while the form factor of a keyboard refers to
its shape and dimensions. The form factor also refers to the number of keys included
in the keyboard parkkinen2018. By combining different layouts and
form factors, different permutations of a keyboard can be created.

Different keyboard layouts and form factors also produce different effects for
the user. This is due to how vastly different some keyboard layouts and form
factors are from one another. Some layouts focus on ergonomics, while others
focus on typing speed. Some form factors were designed for aesthetics, while
others focus on comfort and health. As such, different layouts may affect typing
performance, ergonomics, and long-term health effects ciobanu2015.

ANSI and ISO Layout

There are two common keyboard layouts around the world - iso and ansi.

ansi is the standard that first defined the ansi layout.
Figure  illustrates what the ansi layout looks like. This layout
is also used by countries other than America. Examples of countries that use
this layout as its standard is the Philippines, China, and Korea
apple-layout. However, these countries also opt to modify the layout
by adding extra layers to accommodate other character sets.

iso is the standard series that defines a framework that is used to
create other layouts. Layouts created from this standard are colloquially called
iso Layouts. Countries around the world use this framework to create layouts
that fit the characters in their language. Examples of countries that use this
framework to create their own layout are France, Greece, Canada, and Sweden
apple-layout.

Both of these layouts usually utilize the same key ordering. This ordering is
commonly called QWERTY, based on the first five characters of the first row
of this specific layout.

There are other layouts available, however, they are not as common as the two
previously mentioned layouts. Examples of this include jis. Other esoteric
layouts, like Tsangan or split-backspace, also exist. These layouts modify the
iso and ansi standards by adding or removing certain keys to fit the
character set of a language, or for additional keys. Other layouts are also
exactly the same as ansi or iso, however, these layouts change the
arrangement of the alphabet within the keyboard.

Despite the ubiquity of these common layouts, studies have shown that these
layouts are not ergonomic. The main issue with these layouts is the random
configurations of the letters. The randomness of the layout necessitates
memorization of the layout which reduces the ease of learning, reduces performance
in typing by reducing speed, and increases of typing errors
ciobanu2015.

Keyboard Form Factors

There is only one common keyboard form factor used worldwide: the full-size
keyboard. This keyboard contains all the keys specified in the keyboard
layout. This includes the alphanumeric keys, the function keys, the navigation
cluster, and the numpad.

Other common keyboard form factors are based on the full-size keyboard. The name
of these layouts, 60%, 75%, and 80% reference the remaining number of keys
after cutting a portion off from the full-size keyboard. The 60% keyboards only
contain the alphanumeric cluster while the 80% and 75% layouts retain the
navigation cluster and the function keys parkkinen2018. The main
draw for using keyboards with reduced sizes is for aesthetics, space
constraints, and ergonomics.


			ansi Keyboard layout with form factors. Reprinted from figure-ansi
		
Ergonomic Keyboards Layouts and Form Factors

There have been other keyboard layouts and form factors created to mitigate
common issues associated with QWERTY layouts. These include Colemak, Dvorak, and
Alphabetical layouts. However, studies have shown that the layout itself does
not matter as beginners do not necessarily see the keyboard as a structured set,
but rather as a random collection of characters, even if it is alphabetized
norman1982,

A different form factor has a great effect on ergonomics. One such example of a
form factor is an ergonomic keyboard developed by Microsoft called Microsoft
Natural MultiMedia Keyboard. used this keyboard in
determining that ergonomic keyboards can help in reducing symptoms of neck.
Figure  shows the layout of the Microsoft Natural MultiMedia
Keyboard.


			Microsoft Natural MultiMedia Keyboard. Reprinted from mn
		
There are other form factors other than the full-size keyboard and variations
thereof that focus on ergonomics. One such example is a split keyboard layout
where the keyboard is split in half, one for the left hand and one for the
right. One such benefit, according to, is a more relaxed
position due to typing at shoulder width.

Keyboard Typing Metrics

There are numerous metrics used to quantify keyboard typing performance. Two
common metrics used in the majority of typing tests include Accuracy and Speed.

Standardized Keyboard Typing Assessments

To be able to measure these metrics, a keyboard typing assessment needs to be
done. However, there are no standardized keyboard typing assessments
donica2018. As such, teaching methods and assessments, like
Keyboarding without Tears, Monkeytype, and Keybr, may produce different metrics
for the same typist due to their difference in conducting the assessment.

Speed
Speed, also called as entry rate by, measures the number
of characters entered within a specific time frame. The most common metric that
measures speed is wpm. wpm as defined by is:


Words per Minute

Where,  is the length of the text,  is the time in seconds spent writing
the text. This time starts directly after the first character has been pressed,
and ends when the last letter has been entered. As such,  is subtracted from
, as the time spent to find and press the first character cannot be
accurately determined. However, some typing assessments do not subtract  from
.  refers to the number of seconds in a minute and 
normalizes the metric for the average length of words.


Other metrics also measure speed, but they aren't as commonly used as wpm.
These include Characters per Minute, Gestures per Second, Adjusted Words per
Minute, and Keystrokes per Second

Accuracy
Accuracy measures the number of correctly pressed characters in an input string.
Accuracy, as defined by, is:


Accuracy

Where  is the number of correct characters and  is the length of the
text.

The inverse of accuracy is error rate, where the number of incorrectly pressed
characters is measured instead. describe 5 common error
rate metrics: Error Rate, Minimum String Distance Error Rate, Keystroke per
Character, Erroneous Keystroke Error Rate, and Total Error Rate.

Limitations of the Metrics
These metrics are all based on the inputted characters by the user. These
metrics do not take into account other aspects of keyboard typing such as
posture, hand and wrist positions, and finger placement. Consequently, these
metrics do not give a full picture of the performance of the person typing, and
they only provide a cursory view of how a person types.

Keyboard Typing Methodology
Keyboard typing can be accomplished in numerous ways. The main difference
between the different methodologies is the number of fingers used when typing
and how the typist navigates the keyboard to find the keys. The methodology
ranges from Hunt and Peck to Touch Typing, with variations of the two in
between.

Hunt and Peck uses one finger on one hand to press a key. This method is aided
by using vision to locate the specific key to press hoot1986. On the
other hand, Touch typing uses standard QWERTY mapping to type without using
visual cues. dobson2009touch This mapping involves assigning certain
fingers to certain keys. Figure  is the standard QWERTY
mapping used for an ansi layout. Kinesthesis and proprioception are used in
locating the keys logan2016.


			Standard QWERTY mapping for ansi. Reprinted from logan2016
		
Typing Speed Statistics

Median typing speed using a keyboard with QWERTY layout, based on test data
from, is  wpm. This median is taken from all the test results they have gathered from all of their users.

 released a dataset showing the speed of 12678 members of the
Monkeytype community with the speed role. The dataset shows the fastest time
that these members have achieved on 60 second tests. The median of the dataset
lies in the 100-109 wpm range, with 52.74% of the community having top
speeds slower than 100 wpm.

 also performed a survey with 12 participants using
multiple typing methods. They got an average wpm of 75.85 with a standard
deviation of 15.61 when their participants used a physical QWERTY layout. This
average wpm was also the highest among the other typing methods the
researchers studied.

Keyboard Typing in Education

Today, students are expected to type essays, articles, and other submissions
using word processors poole2016. Testing is also commonly done using
computerized assessments which require the need for keyboards
moodle. As such, there is a need for students to be well versed in
keyboard typing and for keyboard typing to be part of the curriculum.

Keyboard typing has been a part of this curriculum for a long time, with studies
about effective methods to teach keyboard typing reaching as far back as 1986
hoot1986. Studies have continued to this day to continue to optimize
and improve methods of teaching keyboard typing to students.

These studies start teaching kids in the kindergarten level and the studies try
to optimize the teaching methods to improve the speed and accuracy of typing of
the learners. By starting to teach touch typing to students early, these
students will develop the potential for higher-level keyboard typing
donica2018.

Expectations of Keyboard Proficiency

In the United States, keyboard typing is an expected learning outcome for third
grade in the Common Core State Standards ccs. At this grade level,
only basic keyboard typing skills are required. By fourth grade, students are
expected to have enough proficiency to type one page in one sitting. This is
increased to two pages by fifth grade.

In the Philippine context, the expects learners with a mental
age of 4-6.9 years old to use correct posture and locate characters, learners
with a mental age of 7-11.9 are introduced to home row finger placement, and
learners with a mental age of 12 and above are expected to "use proper typing
technique with efficiency and accuracy without looking at the keyboard"
deped.

Current Teaching Methods

Current teaching methods involve replicating a given text. Learners then copy
the text into a given text field that records the typed characters. Correct and
incorrect characters are then identified, and suitable errors are presented.
Afterward, metrics, such as wpm, and accuracy are given
bartnik2021, typeracer.

Through this process, the learner goes through the three stages of Motor
Learning Theory. The student undergoes the cognitive stage where they try to
understand and create strategies to accomplish the given task. Then the
associative stage follows where the strategies and skills learned from the
previous stage are refined. At this stage, the learners are expected to rely less
on visuals to locate the keys and more on kinesthesis. By the final stage, the
autonomous stage, the learner does not rely on visuals at all and focuses on
using kinesthetic feedback to find the keys. By this point, the learner has
progressed from using Hunt and Peck, to becoming proficient in touch typing.
donica2018

Keyboarding without Tears

Keyboarding without Tears is a web-based application and curriculum that teaches
students touch typing. However, one key differentiator of this curriculum is the
usage of a row-based standard mapping, rather than a column-based standard
mapping that is common in other teaching guides. Figure  shows the
standard mapping used in this curriculum.

This curriculum is self-directed and learners can learn at their own pace. At
its core, the curriculum is designed to be 36-week long with 5-10 minutes of
lessons per day. The lessons in the curriculum follow the three stages of
Motor Learning Theory kwt.


			Row based standard mapping. Reprinted from kwt
		

Monkeytype, Typeracer

These two keyboard typing tests are similar. They follow a common experience
where users type a predetermined phrase, quote, or random words, and metrics are
given after the test. Afterward, the learners may try the test again, or choose
another set of words to type. These typing tests do not have a structured
curriculum for learning how to touch type. It is left to the learner to practice
and learn on their own bartnik2021, typeracer.

Keybr

Keybr is similar to Monkeytype and Typerace, in that they also have the users
type a predetermined phrase, quote, or random words. However, this application
has more guidance compared to the two. Keybr uses statistics to create typing
lessons that are appropriate to the current typing proficiency of the learner.
The words selected are random at first, and the skill level of the learner is
determined by the performance of the user with these words and characters. The
information gathered is then used to generate new words for the next iteration.
As an example, if a learner has difficulty in typing the letter q, the next
iterations will have a lot of words that contain the letter q.

Statistics from their website show that this learning method is successful, with
some learners improving their typing speed by 20-40 wpm keybr.

Keyboard Typing in Health

There have been a lot of studies that show the effect of keyboard typing, and
its associated movements (or lack thereof), has an effect on the human body.
These studies have shown that keyboard typing has an effect on our neck, shoulder,
upper limb, wrist, arms, and fingers szeto2005, baker2007digit

Health Issues arising from Keyboard Typing

neck are a common issue that is associated with an elongated length of time
maintaining a static posture. When using the computer, the posture commonly
adapted by users has the neck and shoulder regions in a static hold for a long
time. This results in forward neck flexion and increased muscle tension
szeto2005.

In addition, it has been shown that 22% of computer users sustain
musculoskeletal disorders of the upper extremity. This includes the neck,
shoulder, hands, and wrists. gerr2002

Carpal tunnel syndrome is also a common issue in the general population. This is
caused by the chronic compression of the median nerve. There is a common belief
that typing is one main cause for the disorder carpal-myth. There
are no definite conclusions if this myth is true, however, a study by
toosi2015 found that typing causes ulnar deviation, especially if
done without proper form. This ulnar deviation contributes to the swelling of
the median nerve during and after typing. However, the authors noted that it is
unclear if this swelling leads to long-term nerve injury.

Finger and Wrist Kinematics
The way people move their hands, wrists, and fingers differ between each person.
This can be attributed to the different typing styles each person has. One key
difference between people is the angle of the fifth digit.

However, there are some common movements and positions regardless of typing
style: flexion, or the curving of the fingers, across the fingers, is decreasing
across the hand, with the 2nd digit having the least flexion. This may be due to
the instinct to reduce pronation of the hand, which in turn increases the
distance of the 2nd digit to the keyboard. In addition, some people isolate or
extend one of their thumbs, usually the one not used for pressing a key. This is
also true for some people that do not use their fifth digit during typing
baker2007.

The movement and angle of the wrists also depend on the typing style of the
typists. Some people do not reposition their hands, while others do. This
difference comes from the way these people reach for certain far-away keys. Some
stretch their fingers to reach far-away keys, while others move their entire
hand to reach these keys.

For those that reach their keys by stretching their fingers, there is an
increased probability that the wrists and fingers adapt non-neutral postures.
These include wrist extension, ulnar deviation, and pronation, which may cause
musculoskeletal disorders of the upper extremity ( as cited in
 )

Finger and Hand Tracking
Finger and Hand tracking is a method of tracking fingers and hands in 3D space
using motion capture systems or computer vision. This technique allows computers
to perform actions and analyzes on the motions and positions of these body
parts.


Types of Tracking

Hardware Aided Solutions

Motion Capture Systems allow for capturing detailed skeletal motion in humans.
These systems usually capture full-body motion, focusing on large parts of the
human body, such as the torso, limbs, and head.

However, motion capture systems have difficulty in tracking more articulated
body parts - with the fingers being one of them. The industry standard for
capturing finger movements is through the use of an optical marker-based motion
capture system. This is due to its ability to capture natural motion accurately.

This method uses cameras to triangulate the 3D location of markers attached to
the limbs of a person. For finger tracking, 13-20 markers are placed on the
fingers, and cameras are brought closer to track the small movements of the
finger wheatland2015.

But this method is cost-prohibitive, and cannot handle occlusions well.
alexanderson2016 present a method for an optical marker-based
motion capture system that can predictably recover from self-occlusion and has a
better performance compared to previously used algorithms, however, the issue of
cost and self-occlusion still persists.

Bend-sensor gloves are also an option for finger tracking. These gloves have
sensors within them that track joint angles in the hand and fingers. One key
differentiator of this solution compared to the others is the removal of
self-occlusion in the data. As such, this is commonly used in sign language, and
gesture recognition due to its accuracy.

However, these gloves need a lot of time to calibrate as cross-coupling of the
sensors proves a problem. Cross-coupling is prevalent because the movement of
one finger also moves other parts of the hand. These movements may cause a
sensor aimed to track a specific movement of a different part of the hand to
inadvertently detect a movement when there should be none
wheatland2015.

Computer Vision

At its core, Computer Vision aims to perform tasks that the human visual system
can do cern. This includes object classification, tracking, and
gesture recognition, and face recognition. At the present, most computer vision
systems utilize deep learning algorithms, and convolutional networks to gather
information from an image, or a set of images. One such example of a
convolutional network used in computer vision is Inception by
szegedy2015 which proposes a convolutional neural network
architecture for object classification and detection.

Available CV Solutions for Tracking

OpenCV

OpenCV is an open-source computer vision and machine learning software library
that houses  optimized algorithms. This library is widely used by
companies, researchers, and open source communities that utilize computer vision
and machine learning in their projects. Examples of companies that use OpenCV
include Google, Sony, and Honda.

The library has C++, Python, Java, and Matlab interfaces. The library also supports
Windows, Linux, Android, and macOS, allowing for great developer experience, and
wide deployment capabilities opencv.

MediaPipe

MediaPipe is an open-source computer vision framework that allows developers to
create a perception pipeline. This perception pipeline is a directed graph of
calculators. Data passes through the graph as packets and a group of packets
constitutes a data stream. As the data passes through the pipeline, the
calculators, produce the desired output.

This framework allows for performant object detection, hand and finger tracking,
human pose detection. The framework also allows for combining multiple features,
by adding them to the graph as calculators. MediaPipe has C++, Python, JS, and
Coral interfaces. It also supports Android and iOS devices
mediapipe.

MATLAB
MATLAB is a programming platform for the analysis and designing of systems.
MATLAB is commonly used by engineers and scientists for computational
mathematics what-matlab.

A toolbox offered by MATLAB is the Computer Vision Toolbox that contains
algorithms, and functions for use in the development of computer vision, 3D
vision, and video processing systems. By using the available algorithms in the
toolbox, such as YOLOv2, and ACF, hand detection and gesture recognition is made
possible in the platform matlab.

Applications

There have been multiple applications and products that utilize hand and finger
tracking as their main component.

 presents a use case for finger tracking in augmented
environments. In the paper, interaction in a virtual environment through the use
of gestures. The tracking system uses an optical marker-based motion capture
system where the user wears a glove with retroreflective markers.

 used a Kinect, a 3D sensing device by Microsoft that
uses depth data, to track fingers to play virtual instruments. Virtual Pianos
and Guitars were created and played with reliable and stable tracking.

 created a virtual keyboard that operates using finger
tracking. The tracking uses the movement of the finger joints as the basis for
selecting which key to press. A camera captures the movement, and the resulting
video stream is used for hand region detection and finger joint localization.
Using probabilistic regional density-based kernel tracking, finger joint
trajectories are gathered. Feature vectors are then interpreted from the
trajectories. These feature vectors are used in logic-based techniques and
Dynamic Bayesian Network for classification, detection, and recognition of
keystrokes.

Summary of the Research Gap
While there are a lot of applications and curriculum aimed at teaching touch
typing, there is no automated system available that detects if a person uses the
correct finger to press a key.

By having this system, educators can accurately determine if and when a student
is having a hard time typing and if these students will need an intervention to
correct mistakes.

This is also important because certain movements and hand positions will cause
nerve and muscular disorders that will impact the user. By correcting these
problematic movements and hand positions, these disorders can be prevented.

Methodology

Setup

The experimental setup and configuration was composed of three elements: the
camera, the keyboard, and the environment. Figure  is an
image of the experimental setup



			The experimental setup
		
Camera
The setup used a single monocular camera positioned in a top-down view. The
camera captured the entirety of the keyboard and the movement of the ten
fingers. To do so, it was mounted on top of the monitor with the camera pointed
down towards the table. Figure illustrates how the camera was mounted over the monitor and
Figure  is a picture taken with the camera at this
position.


			The camera angled downwards to capture the keyboard
	

			Image captured by the camera in one of the training iterations
	
The specific camera used was a Logitech C920. It is a 3 mega pixel webcam that
is capable of capturing color video in 1080p/30fps and 720p/30fps with a
diagonal field of view of 78. This camera has a universal mounting clip
that allows the camera to be correctly positioned within the experimental setup
logitech.

Keyboard

The keyboard used was a 60% keyboard as shown in
Figure . This limited the necessary mapping for the
algorithm to the alphanumeric portion of the keyboard. This keyboard choice also
reduced the area that the camera captured, as this keyboard type is considerably
smaller compared to a full-size keyboard. The keyboard also had its keycaps and
case in a light color that contrasted the dark surface it was placed on. It also
had a dark USB-C cable to blend with the dark surface. These color coordination
steps improved initial keyboard detection. In addition, the keyboard layout was
ANSI, due to the availability and widespread adoption of the layout in the
Philippines.

Computer
The computer used to run the algorithm is a desktop computer with the following
specification:


			
	Computer Specifications

Environment
The setup was lit with a lamp besides the camera. This light source evenly lit
the keyboard and the fingers used for typing. The light source used was a common
LED bulb rated at 9 Watts with 700 lumens. This light was white with a color
temperature of 6500k.

In addition, the surface where the keyboard was placed on was solid black
without any variation of color. This also improved initial keyboard detection.

Algorithm

Computer Vision based Keyboard Detection, and Key Mapping

A computer vision algorithm was created as a starting point
mapping the keys of the keyboard within a video. A rough flowchart of the algorithm
is shown in Figure .


		
	Flowchart of Keyboard Detection and Mapping Algorithm
	

Get Image Map
The first portion of the algorithm creates an image map that is overlaid over
the detected edges of the keyboard. The flowchart for this function is shown in
Figure .


		
	Flowchart of Get Image Map
	

Convert to Grayscale
The input frame from the camera was converted to a 256 level grayscale image
using cvtColor of OpenCV opencv-cvtColor. This step was
performed because future steps of the algorithm did not require color values to
work. In addition, this step optimized the algorithm as the number of dimensions
analyzed was reduced. Figure  is the output of this
step.


			Camera capture converted to grayscale
		
Denoising
The algorithm denoised the grayscale image using a bilateral filter as
implemented by OpenCV opencv-bilateral-filter. This filter takes the
range of the image into account, rather than just the domain. This resulted in
an image that is smoothed while preserving its edges
bilateral-filter. Figure  is the output
of this step.


			Smoothed image with intact edges
		

Edge Detection
The algorithm used a Sobel filter for edge detection. This filter uses a
33 kernel that is convolved twice. Once horizontally, and another
vertically to produce a grayscale image of the outlines within the frame. The
kernels used by the Sobel filter sobel2014 is shown in
Figure  and Figure  is
the output of this step.


		
	
	Sobel Operator Kernels. Reproduced from sobel2014
	

			Output of the Sobel filter
		
Thresholding
The output of the Sobel filter is a grayscale image of 255 values, with each
gray pixel indicating edges within the image. There is a need to reduce the
range of these values to improve the ability of the algorithm to find the
contours of these edges. To do so, the algorithm utilized Otsu's algorithm to
perform automated thresholding. Otsu's algorithm determines a single threshold
that is most optimal for the image otsu. This outputs a
black-and-white image, with only two values. Figure is the resulting output of this step.


			Threshed image of the edges
		

Find Contours
Contours are curves joining all continuous points that have the same color or
intensity opencv-contours. The OpenCV function
findContours, with the CHAINAPPROXSIMPLE contour
approximation method, was used to find the contours of the outlines of the
object found using the previous step. This approximation method removed
redundant points and returned the least amount of points that describes the
shape. This OpenCV function implements the algorithm of  in their
paper. Figure  shows the contours
found in the threshed image.


			All the contours found in the image
		
Simplify Contour
However, the points returned by the function can contain more than the four
extreme points at the edges of the keyboard. In addition, more than one contour
may be found within the image. As such, the algorithm sorted the contours by
area, and selected the largest one.

After sorting, the algorithm performed the Douglas-Peucker algorithm for Line
Simplification douglas-peucker. This reduced the number of points in
the largest contour to the minimum amount. In ideal cases, the number of points
would be four, with each point corresponding to the edges of the keyboard.
However, there were times when other objects would be within the frame, or they
intersected with the keyboard. This would result in a contour that would be
defined by more than four points - which caused the entire algorithm to fail.

The contour points that described the contour were then sorted clockwise. This
was a necessity since the algorithm of  does not guarantee that
the largest contour's points were returned in a clockwise arrangement, which is
a requirement for the next step. Figure shows the four contour points found at the edges of the keyboard within the
image.


			Simplified contour
		

Transform Image Map
The virtual keyboard map is a rectangular image that contains individual
roi for each key in a 60% ansi keyboard. Each key has a corresponding
color assigned to it and this color fills the region where this key is located
at. Figure  is the initial image map and Appendix
Chapter  is a table that shows the hex color code and key
mapping present in the image map.


			Initial Image Map
		
The virtual map was stretched over the keyboard using OpenCV's
warpPerspective function. The function requires a perspective transform
that was calculated using getPerspectiveTransform. This function takes
in two arrays with four points each. The input points are the edges of the
virtual map, ordered clockwise. The output points are the four points of the
contour, ordered clockwise opencv-image-transform. The resulting
transform was then used by warpPerspective to apply the transform to
the virtual map. Figure  is the image obtained
after warping the image map.


			Transformed image map
		
Get Key Contour Points
The second portion of the algorithm pre-computes the contour points of each key
in the keyboard based on the generated virtual map and the Key-Color Values map.
The flowchart of this function is shown in
Figure 

		
	Flowchart of Get Key Contour Points
	
Filter Virtual Map
The color that corresponds to each key in the virtual map is stored in the
Key-Color Value Map. This color was used to create a mask for the virtual map
for a specific key. This mask was obtained by using this snippet of code
(virtualMap == key).all(axis=2). This mask was then used to black out
the rest of the virtual map, leaving only the roi of the key in the image.

This specific method was used as the other method that was trialed,
np.where(virtualMap != key), did not consider all 3 channels when
comparing each pixel - i.e. a key assigned with the color value of
[100, 0, 0] will not be blacked out if the color value of the key to be
isolated is [100, 243, 0] as the blue channel of the pixel,
100 is equal in both. This would result in other keys remaining in the
virtual map, even if only one key corresponds to that color.
Figure  shows the image where the Left Control key
was isolated.


			Filtered key
		
Find and Simplify Contours
The same method in finding and simplifying the contour of the keyboard was used
to find and simplify the contour of the roi of the key.
Figure  illustrates the four edges of the
isolated key.


			Contour points of the roi
		
Scale Contours
During testing using training data, a lot of the failures in finger-key
identification was due to the tight fit of the contour to the key. The contour
on its own did not give enough buffer for the placement of the finger. This
buffer was needed as, in some instances, the finger used to press the key was
not exactly on top of the key, but rather to its side. The algorithm accounts
for this situation by adding a buffer. This was achieved through scaling the
contour points by seven pixels on each side.
Figure  shows the increased buffer in relation to
the key. This value was obtained after testing other possible values. A buffer
of five pixels did not have a lot of effect in reducing the number of failures.
A buffer of ten pixels did reduce the number of failures, but it also greatly
increased the algorithm's uncertainty in determining the finger - uncertainty
is defined as detecting two or more fingers within one roi. Seven was a
good middle ground in decreasing failures, without greatly increasing
uncertainty.


			Contour points of the roi
		
Key-Edge Coordinates Map
After all the keys have passed through the loop, a Key-Edge Coordinates Map was
generated. Each key now has four points that serve as the coordinates of the
edge of its roi.

The coordinate system that the contour points are based on had its origin at the
top left, starting at 0, 0. Going to the right increased the value of the
x-axis, and going to the bottom increased the value of the y-axis. This results
in a coordinate system that only has positive values with each value
corresponding to a pixel.


Computer Vision based Finger Detection, and Tracking
MediaPipe Hands was used as the finger detection and tracking solution. This
algorithm is composed of two ML models working in conjunction to be able to
detect the different parts of the hands and track them accurately.

Palm Detection Model
The first model, the Palm Detection Model detects the initial hand locations
using a single shot detector model based on the paper by . This model
achieves an average precision of 95.7% in palm detection
mediapipe-hands.

MediaPipe Hands detects the palms first, instead of whole hands with one model
because hands lack high contrast patterns. This reduces the model's ability to
detect hands with accuracy. In addition, detecting a palm is simpler compared
to detecting hands with articulated fingers since estimating a bounding box
around a rigid object, i.e. a palm, is much simpler. Furthermore, a palm can be
modeled using only square anchors reducing the number of anchors by a factor of
3-5 mediapipe-hands.

Hand Landmark Model
After the palms have been detected and an appropriate anchor has been
established, the Hand Landmark Model pinpoints 21 3D hand-knuckle coordinates
inside the detected hand. This is done using direct coordinate prediction.

This model was trained using 30,000 manually annotated, real-world images with
21 3D hand-knuckle coordinates. Using this information, the model can also
accurately add landmarks to partially visible hands and hands with
self-occlusion. This is also made possible by the model's consistent internal
hand pose representation mediapipe-hands.

Integration for finger-key identification and mapping

The two previously chosen algorithms was combined to accomplish finger-key
identification and mapping.

The integration of the algorithm was a two-step process. The first step was to
get the Key-Edge Coordinates Map shown in
Section .

The second step runs whenever a key press has been detected. This step used the
Key-Edge Coordinates Map in conjunction with the finger tracking algorithm selected
in Section . The flowchart of the algorithm is
shown in Figure 

		
	rectangle connector/.style=
	-latex,
	to path=() - ++(6cm,0pt) - () ,
	pos=0.5
	,
	
	
	Flowchart of the overall flow
	
Find which fingertip is on that roi
The Finger Tracking Data contained the pixel positions of each landmark of the
hand. For this step, the algorithm finds the landmark which is positioned within
the single roi obtained from the previous step. This was done using a
series of checks.

Each landmark's coordinates was compared to the coordinates of the edges of the
roi. A landmark was determined as positioned within the roi if all the
following conditions are true:


	In the X axis, the landmark's coordinates is greater than one or both of
	      the two coordinates found of the left side of the roi
	In the X axis, the landmark's coordinates is less than one or both of
	      the two coordinates found of the right side of the roi
	In the Y axis, the landmark's coordinates is greater than one or both of
	      the two coordinates found of the top side of the roi
	In the Y axis, the landmark's coordinates is less than one or both of
	      the two coordinates found of the bottom side of the roi

These conditions maximized the total area of the roi, and it is not strict
about exact accuracy. In essence, these conditions creates a perfectly
rectangular box that contained the quadrilateral formed by the four points from
the coordinates. Figure  is an example of a frame with a
successful finger-key identification using the conditions previously mentioned.


			Fingertip within an roi
		
Return which fingertip
The landmark was then used to determine which specific finger corresponds to the
key press. Figure  shows each possible
landmark that may be returned from the previous step. This step returned the
name of the landmark, up until the first underscore. As an example, if the
landmark found is MIDDLEFINGERTIP, this step will return
MIDDLE denoting that the middle finger is the finger that corresponds
with the key press. In addition, the specific hand will also be returned as one
of two strings, LEFT and RIGHT, since this information is also
bundled together with the landmarks. The two strings were then concatenated with
an underscore. An example return value is RIGHTRING.

As such, the expected output of the module is the hand and the finger used to
press the key. This allows for a more flexible utilization of the data as it
carries greater context, compared to just returning if the finger used was
correct or not.


			Hand landmarks that may be returned by the algorithm. Reproduced from mediapipe-hands.
		
Implementation
The previously discussed algorithms was implemented using Python. The Keyboard
Detection, and Mapping Algorithm in Section was implemented as a separate module in Python using OpenCV. The Finger
Detection, and Tracking Solution in Section  was
consumed using the prebuilt Python package offered by the MediaPipe team.
Finally, the integration of the two will be done as another separate module
in Python.

Training and Testing

Typing Test Sequences
Typing test sequences are strings that was used in testing the user in their
ability to type. The test sequences that was used came from text found in the
public domain obtained from Project Gutenberg and the Internet Archive.
Sentences were isolated from these text and used as test sequences if they fit
the criteria.

The criteria for choosing test sequences were as follows: (1)  of the
characters in the keyboard is present in a test sequence. (2) The number of
words in a test sequence do not exceed 25. (3) Numbers and punctuations should
be present in at least  of the total test sequences.

There was a total of 10 test sequences that was gathered. An example test
sequence is "What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a
broom and sweep down the decks?" from Moby Dick by . The 9
other test sequences can be found in Appendix
Chapter .

Data Gathering
Video Capture
There were 3 groups of 10 videos that were captured by the researcher, for a
total of 30 videos. Each group corresponds to three predetermined speeds of
typing: slow (15wpm), average (35wpm), and fast (80wpm). These speeds were based
on test data from . The researcher typed the 10 typing test
sequences at these predetermined speeds. During typing, errors were not
consciously taken into account, and errors happened naturally as part of the
typing process.

A Python script was created to facilitate this process. The script captured a
video of the researcher as the researcher was typing the test sequences.
Whenever the researcher pressed a key, the corresponding frame count was
captured, and the key pressed was recorded in conjunction. This was stored in
the format FRAMENO:KEYPRESSED, and each keypress was then stored as
a line in a file.

One caveat of the camera used was its autofocus capabilities. This meant that
there was a set amount of time during the start of the recording where the
camera captured blurry images of the keyboard. This necessitates around three
seconds for the autofocus to complete and focus on the keyboard. There was one
video capture where the whole test sequence was scrapped as the researcher
started typing even if the camera was not focused.

Keypress Labelling
The researcher then manually perform finger-key identification for all key
presses present in the video. This was also done through a Python script. The
script parsed the file associated with a video. The frame number found at each
line was then shown, and the associated data with the frame was superimposed
over it. Figure  is an example of frame with these
data overlaid over the captured image. The researcher then pressed keys that
corresponded with the finger used to press the key. This was then again stored
in the format FRAMENO:KEYPRESSED:FINGERUSED, and each keypress
was then stored as a line in a file.


			Screen showing the labelling process
		

Test-Training Split
The annotated data was then divided into training and test data at a ratio of
60:40.

Training
A script was created to test the accuracy of the module. This script opened each
video, and the associated labeled file. There were three frames taken for each
video to perform step one of the module: frames ten, fifteen, and twenty. The
first frame that returned a Key-Edge Coordinates Map after going through step
one of the module was used. The rest of the frames were not passed through the
module and were discarded.

The script then parsed the labeled file, and opened the frame for each keypress.
The second algorithm of the module was then run, using the data needed for the
algorithm: the key pressed. The result of the module was then compared with the
manual labelling of the keypress. The resulting data from the test was then
stored in a .csv file with the following content:


			
	CSV File Contents

Adjustments were then made to the algorithm after each training pass to improve
its performance. Some runs had improvements in its statistics without doing any
adjustments. These were runs that showed errors in the manual labelling and
were corrected afterward.

Analysis
The resulting .csv file was imported into Google Sheets and key
statistics were obtained based on the data. These statistics can be found on
Table . These key statistics informed what to adjust in
the algorithm and its overall performance.


			
	Acquired statistics

Testing
The same script was run through the test data. The same format of output was
gathered, and the same key statistics were recorded.




























































































Metrics

There was a two total metrics obtained pertaining to finger and key mapping.
The first was per test sequence, and the second was per key.

Per Test Sequence
The metric which calculates per test sequence is fpacc. This metric
computes the percentage of accurate keys pressed with the correct finger over the
length of the typing test sequence. Inputting the wrong character, even if
pressed with the correct finger, reduces fpacc since fpacc measures
accurate key presses, and incorrect characters are considered as
inaccurate key presses.

The equation for calculating fpacc is as follows:


Finger Placement Accuracy


Where  refers to the number of accurate keys pressed with the
correct finger and  refers to the length of the text.

Per Key
This metric, hfpacc, computes the accuracy of the user in pressing a
certain key with the correct finger over all test sequences. The same criteria
in determining accurate key presses This allows the user to easily verify which keys need
attention and retraining if there is a high frequency of error.

The equation for calculating a key's hfpacc is as follows:


Historical Finger Placement Accuracy

Where  refers to the number of accurate keys pressed with the
correct finger for a certain character, identified as . 
refers to the number of times the character has appeared in all test sequences
for the user.

Results and Discussion

Accuracy
Accuracy, in the context of the finger-key identification module calculates the
percentage of successful finger-key identifications that the module has
performed. In this case, success is defined as having the expected finger, based
on the manual labelling, equal the return value of the module. Accuracy is
calculated as


Finger-Key Identification Module Accuracy

Where  is the number of successful finger-key identifications, and  is
the total number of keypresses for all typing test sequences. This is also
referred to as the success percentage.

Training Results
There were a total of seven training iterations. These training iterations
served as a way to improve the performance of the module by adjusting its
parameters.

Identifications


		
	Identification results of the training iterations
	
Over the seven training iterations, there was an increase in success percentage
as shown in Figure . Consequently, there was
also a decrease in failure percentage. There was a total of 1475 total
keypresses for iterations one to three, and 1571 total keypresses for iteration
four to seven.

The increase in total keypresses starting from iteration four was due to adding
multiple tries to the training routine in obtaining the Key-Edge Coordinates
Map. Iterations one through three only tried frame 10 as the source frame for
the module while iterations four through seven tried frame 10, 15, and 20.

There was a need to try different frames since the camera was not consistent in
its ability to focus on the keyboard for each video. In some videos video, the
camera was not focused on the keyboard on frame 10, but it was able to focus on
frame 15. As a result, the total number of available keypresses to test
increased.

The 0.48% jump between iteration one and two can be attributed to correcting
erroneous finger-key identifications that was obtained from manual labelling.
The 9.56% jump in success percentage between iteration two and three was due to
adding buffers around the roi by scaling the contours by 10 pixels on each
side. Iteration four's increase was due to fixing the image map. There were
certain keys that had incorrect color values assigned in the Key-Color Values
Map, and some keys were of incorrect shape. Iterations five to seven were
performed to test different values and shapes for scaling the roi.

Uncertain Successes


		
	Uncertain Successes of the training iterations
	
Uncertain Successes are instances where the finger-key identification module was
able to detect two or more fingertips within the roi of the key. As such,
the module is uncertain which of the multiple fingertips actually pressed the
key. However, it is still classified as a success since the expected finger from
the manual labelling exists within the array of fingertips returned by the
module. Figure  shows the trend of this
metric over the course of the different training iterations.

Spacebar
In a 60% keyboard, the spacebar is the longest key on the keyboard. In
addition, this key is right below the non-dominant hand's thumb default resting
position when the hand's posture follows the proper touch typing posture. As
such, it was to be expected that a majority of the uncertain successes were
because of the spacebar. However, this was not the case for iterations three and
four. This was because the buffer for the roi was too big and this caused
the module to detect more than one fingertip within that roi.

Non-spacebar
There were cases where the module had uncertain successes that were not over the
spacebar. In almost practically all cases, these were over the alphanumeric
keys. This uncertain successes stem from the increased buffer of the roi.
This type of uncertain successes carry more weight compared to spacebar
uncertain successes since the keys where these uncertain successes come from are
the smallest keys in the keyboard. This means that the chances that a person
actually has two or more fingers over the keys is rare, compared to the
spacebar.


Uncertain Successes vs Success Percentage


		
	Uncertain Successes of the training iterations
	

Tuning the algorithm required managing both uncertain successes and the success
percentage and making compromises between one or the other. The goal of the
training process was to maximize the success percentage, while limiting the
number of uncertain successes.

As seen in Figure , it can
be noted that in iterations one and two, the success rate was lower compared to
the other iterations. However, the percentage of uncertain successes was also
the lowest. Iteration three was the first iteration that created a buffer around
each key, however this buffer of 10 pixels was too aggressive, with the
uncertain successes spiking upwards to nearly 30%. Iteration five reduced the
buffer size in half to five pixels. This did not affect success rate that much,
with only a reduction of 1.07%. This also greatly decreased the uncertain
success percentage by 16.74%. The sixth iteration met halfway between iteration
four and five, by adding a buffer of seven pixels. This increased the success
rate back to 99.17% without greatly increasing the number of uncertain
successes. In comparison with the fourth iteration, the sixth iteration had its
success rate decrease by 0.38%, but its percentage of uncertain successes
decreased by 12.67%. A seventh iteration was trialed where the increase in
buffer was asymmetrical. For each key, the points nearer the user were increased
by 10 pixels, while the points farther away were increased by five pixels only.
This slightly increased the success rate by 0.32%. However, the percentage of
uncertain successes also increased by 5.28%.

While the percentage of uncertain successes in iterations five through seven was
in the range of 13% to 20%, The majority of these uncertain successes were
spacebar uncertain success, as shown in
Figure .

Based on these results, the final selected parameters for the module was the
parameters set in iteration six, with the buffer set to seven pixels as it was a
good middle ground between success rate, and uncertain successes.


Failure Types


		
	Uncertain Successes of the training iterations
	
Mismatched Identification
These are failures where the module did not return the expected fingertip based
on the manual labelling. This type of failure only manifested in iterations one
and three. The failures in iteration one, after double-checking the video, were
due to an error during manual labelling. In iteration three, these errors were
due to an incorrect image map and Key-Color Values map. The information for some
keys were not consistent between both.

Based on this information and from the gathered data as shown in
Figure , This failure type is non-existent
for the module in real-life conditions.

No Identification
These are failures where the module did not detect any fingertips within the
roi. These made up all the failures from the test results. These types of
failures occurred because the fingertips used to press the key were not directly
above the key, but rather offset to its side. Scaling the roi would reduce
the number of no identification failures, but it would also increase the number
of uncertain successes. See Section ,
Uncertain Successes vs Success Percentage for more information.

Occlusion
The module was also successful in finger-key identification, even if both the
key and finger was occluded. Figure  is one frame where
this occurred. The module was successful in identifying that the Left Thumb was
used to press the Left Shift.


			Occluded finger and key
	

Test Results

			
	Accuracy Results of the Module with Test Data

Table  provides the accuracy results of the module with
test data. These results were satisfactory after running the module with the
parameters from the sixth training iteration on the test data. There was another
run with the same test data and the same parameters, however these results were
omitted since this run had inconclusive results as there was a single
identification that was incorrectly labeled during manual finger-key
identification.

Speed

Based on the definition of wpm from as seen in
Equation , it can be extrapolated that calculating cps is:


Characters per Second

The average wpm when typing using the QWERTY layout, according to test
data from is  wpm. As such, we can
calculate that the average Characters per Second when typing using the QWERTY
layout is 3.125. We can calculate the seconds need per character by this equation:


Seconds per Character

This means that each character, on average, requires 0.32
seconds to type. This sets the maximum time spent for finger-key identification
for a single character. Any more than this would result in noticeable slowdown
during typing.

Results

Training Iterations


		
	Keyboard detection time of the training iterations
	
The training iterations had an average keyboard detection time of
 and average finger identification time of .
Over the course of the training, there was no noticeable difference between
running time over the same dataset as shown in
Figure . However, The first
training iteration had issues with gathering the speed of the module, as the
average keyboard detection time included other operations that was not part of
getting the Key-Edge Coordinates Map. Removing this iteration, the average
keyboard detection time becomes more consistent, with it being
.

Test Results


			
	Speed Results of the Module with Test Data

These results, as tabulated in Table  were consistent with the
training iterations. These means that the module has repeatable and predictable
running times.

Average Keyboard Detection Time
This is the time that was measured as the module generated the Key-Edge
Coordinates Map. This corresponds with the first step of the module. It is to be
noted that this time does not affect keyboard typing and is not limited by the
0.32 threshold as the user is not yet typing at this point.

Average Finger Identification Time
This is the time spent in finger-key identification for a single key. As such,
this time should be below 0.32 seconds for the module to be capable of
performing finger-key identification in real-time without noticeable slowdown
from the perspective of the user.

The average finger identification time that the module got, 0.083s was
well below 0.32s. This can be attributed to the speed of the MediaPipe
library, and the pre-calculation of the edge coordinates.

Real Time Finger-Key Identification
With each keypress only requiring 0.083s for finger-key identification, it can
be gathered that the maximum cps which the module can still perform
real-time finger-key identification is 11.9200 cps, based on
Equation . It follows that the maximum wpm that still allows for
real-time finger-key identification is 143.040 wpm, based on
Equation . This is well above the median of 37.5 wpm on Keybr.
The module can also perform finger-key identification for 90.99% of the
community members of Monkeytype with the speed role.

Conclusion

The development of a finger-key identification module was successful.

The finger-key identification solution was split into two parts, keyboard
detection and key mapping, and finger detection. Keyboard detection and key
mapping used the following algorithm and techniques: (1) Edge Detection using
Sobel filter sobel2014, (2) Thresholding using Otsu's algorithm
otsu, (3) Finding contours using the algorithm of,
(4) Line Simplification using the Douglas-Peucker algorithm
douglas-peucker, and (5) Perspective transform
opencv-image-transform. Finger detection utilized a ready-made
solution called MediaPipe Hands by. The two were combined to
perform finger-key identification.

The keyboard used was a 60% keyboard in ANSI. It was a light in color, and was
connected with a black USB-C cable. The surface of the desk was dark, and a LED
Bulb rated at 9 Watts, 700 lumens, and 6500k color temperature was used to
uniformly light the capture area. The single optical camera, a Logitech C920,
was placed above the keyboard, pointing directly downwards. It captured videos
in 720p/30fps with a diagonal field of view of 78logitech.
The computer used had a AMD Ryzen 5 3600 CPU, AMD Radeon RX 5600 XT GPU, G.Skill
Trident Z Neo RGB 16GB 3200mhz RAM, and Samsung SSD 850 EVO SSD.

The development of the module utilized OpenCV as the main image manipulation
platform that implemented the algorithms mentioned previously. OpenCV was also
used to capture videos from the optical camera. It was all written in Python.

The module was accurate in 99.47% of identifications in a data set composed of
942 keypresses. However, 14.12% of the identifications were uncertain
successes. These are successes where more than one fingertip was found in an
roi. Of these, 6.48% were non-spacebar uncertain successes. These are
uncertain successes where that was not over the spacebar. This bears more weight
since these keys were the smallest in the keyboard, and in most cases, only one
fingertip could actually fit within the key. These uncertain successes were due to
the addition of a buffer around each roi to increase success rate.

The module is fast enough for real-time finger-key identification up to typing
speeds of 143.040 wpm. This is above the median typing speed of 37.5
wpm on Keybr keybr. This also handles 90.99% of the 12678
members with the speed role on MonkeyType monkey-stats.

Two metrics were developed: (1) Finger Placement Accuracy which computes the
percentage of keys pressed with the correct figure over the length of the test
sequence, and (2) Historical Finger Placement Accuracy which computes the amount
of times the user is successful if pressing a key with the correct finger over
all test sequences.

Future Work

Trainer
The paper only presented a module for finger-key identification and did not
include a trainer that utilized the module. This would allow the module to be
used by actual users and allow for further testing to be done.

Effects on Touch Typing Education
The paper created a method for finger-key identification in hopes of improving
touch typing education, however there was no test done to prove that the module
will have an effect on the learner's skill in touch typing

Effects on Health
In connection with the previous section, the module also has no testing done to
quantify if training using the module will improve the posture and reduce
problematic hand positions and movements that can cause nerve and muscular
disorders.

Environmental Setup
The environmental setup was tightly controlled, with the keyboard and the desk
of contrasting color, lighting was nearly perfect, and the camera was of great
quality. This is not realistic and is not representative of the real world.
Future work could improve upon this area. An idea would be to have a separate
process where the user could just select four points rather than relying on an
automated computer vision process to detect the four edges.

Detecting Keyboard Movement Between Frames
The module is limited in its ability to track keyboards that move between
keypresses. While this is not something that usually happens during keyboard
typing, having the ability to track movements would be a great addition in
improving the module's performance.

Different Keyboard Types, Layouts, and Colors
The module is limited to detecting keypresses with a 60% keyboard. This type of
keyboard is not that commonly used. Other keyboard types, like the 100%, 75%,
and TKLs would be good starting points for adding support. In addition,
supporting other layouts, like ISO, would also greatly increase the number of
people that could use the module. Furthermore, supporting other color schemes
would also widen the number of keyboards that can be used with the module.


Key-Color Values Map

Hex Color Code&1lCorresponding Key 
 

	2rContinued on next column 
 

	
	2rConcluded 
 
ll
	FF0000 &             

	FF9900 & 1                 

	FFE600 & 2                 

	BDFF00 & 3                 

	8FFF00 & 4                 

	33FF00 & 5                 

	00FF66 & 6                 

	00FFC2 & 7                 

	00E0FF & 8                 

	00A3FF & 9                 

	0066FF & 0                 

	000AFF & -                 

	5200FF & +                 

	BD00FF & Backspace         


	E00000 & Tab               

	D68000 & Q	 

	E1CB00 & W	 

	A0D900 & E	 

	7EE000 & R	 

	2BD900 & T	 

	00D856 & Y	 

	00C395 & U	 

	00B7D0 & I	 

	0088D4 & O	 

	004FC5 & P	 

	0008D3 & [	 

	3F00C5 & ]	 

	8600B5 & 	 


	C30000 & CapsLock          

	A76400 & A	 

	B2A100 & S	 

	7CA800 & D	 

	65B400 & F	 

	1F9D00 & G	 

	008B38 & H	 

	018B6A & J	 

	008294 & K	 

	005E93 & L	 

	003482 & :	 

	0007AA & "	 

	23006D & Enter	 


	960000 & LeftShift         

	683E00 & Z	 

	827500 & X	 

	4D6800 & C	 

	3F7100 & V	 

	125800 & B	 

	00421A & N	 

	005440 & M	 

	004B55 & ,	 

	00466D & .	 

	002050 & /	 

	000580 & RightShift	 


	550000 & LeftControl       

	2D0000 & LeftSuper         

	3A2300 & LeftAlt           

	3E3700 & Spacebar	 

	003238 & RightAlt	 

	001C2C & RightMeta 	 

	000349 & RightSuper	 

	18004D & RightControl 	 


Typing Test Sequences

	"What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and sweep down the decks?" moby-dick
	"I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the Battery." moby-dick
	"I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before I could hope for a resurrection." moby-dick
	"How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow!" frankenstein
	"I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable of offering any reply." frankenstein
	"Think you’re escaping and run into yourself. Longest way round is the shortest way home." ulysses
	"History, Stephen said, is a nightmare from which I am trying to awake" ulysses
	"A man of genius makes no mistakes. His errors are volitional and are the portals of discovery." ulysses
	"Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details" sherlock
	"I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data." sherlock

Front-End Screens

			Page showing historical statistics of the user
	

			Introduction to the platform during first open
	

			Step 1 of the tour of the platform
	

			Step 2 of the tour of the platform
	

			Step 3 of the tour of the platform
	
Gantt Chart

	[pages=-,landscape,scale=0.8,pagecommand=]images/gantt-chart.pdf

[heading=bibintoc,title=References]

